Incentivizing investment in real climate action
Our Carbon Credit 
Ratings Framework for 
Biochar Projects
Published February 2025
Introduction
Sylvera Ratings are the most reliable and trustworthy in the market. 
Sylvera has developed a rigorous boom-up approach in order to produce the 
most accurate ratings and analyses for projects in the carbon markets.  
What sets Sylvera apart
●
Project-type-speciﬁc frameworks: We build rigorous frameworks and 
production systems for every project category to accurately test project 
design, carbon accounting, and climate impact claims. 
Sylvera’s frameworks are peer-reviewed by a commiee of experts and 
carbon market stakeholders – including project developers & registries – to 
ensure scientiﬁc consensus. We have published this document so buyers 
understand how we developed our unique, nuanced framework, and we 
have included some examples of  exactly what we test and how we do it. 
Read our white paper for more information.
●
Unparalleled depth & accuracy: We extract, clean, and organize data from 
project design documentation (PDD) and every monitoring report. Then we 
meticulously build carbon, strength of baseline and ﬁnancial additionality 
models from the ground up to validate emissions reductions or removals 
claims and evaluate project economics. 
Our project assessments are the most comprehensive in the market, 
providing granular analysis of core project characteristics, insightful data 
visualizations, and interactive maps.
●
Independent Data Validation: Our expert analysts leverage advanced 
machine learning (ML) technology, veriﬁed, independent data, and 
proprietary ﬁeld data to test the accuracy of credit issuances and claims.
The comparison of independent data speciﬁc to each project against the 
data reported in the project’s documentation is the cornerstone of high 
quality due diligence.
Key terms and concepts 
3
Biochar
Biochar is a stable organic carbon compound formed through pyrolysis.
Biochar Decay Rate
Decay rate refers to the speed at which biochar’s stored carbon is released back into the atmosphere due to 
environmental and external factors such as soil conditions and temperature, application methods, and 
natural risks.
Biochar Stability Rate
Stability rate measures the longevity of biochar’s carbon storage, indicating how eectively it resists 
degradation and remains sequestered over time, typically for periods exceeding 100 years.
Carbon credit
A tradable unit representing one metric ton of carbon dioxide (CO2), or an equivalent amount of another 
greenhouse gas (GHG), avoided or removed from Earth’s atmosphere.
Greenhouse Gas (GHG) 
Emissions
Refers to the release of gases into the atmosphere that trap heat and contribute to climate change.
Hydrogen to Carbon 
Ratio (H/C)
The hydrogen to carbon ratio correlates with the stability of biochar. 
Internal Rate of Return 
(IRR)
Internal Rate of Return used for investment analysis to estimate the return on an investment.
Life Cycle Assessment 
(LCA)
This refers to the analysis conducted to estimate the amount of emissions associated with the sourcing of 
biomass, the creation of biochar and its deployment.
Over-crediting risk
This refers to the risk that the project has issued credits in excess of what is justiﬁable against the business 
as usual scenario.
Oxygen to Carbon 
Ratio (O/C)
The oxygen to carbon ratio correlates with the stability of biochar. 
Permanence 
Adjustment Factor
This refers to the percentage of carbon that will stay secure in the biochar for the next 100 years. 
Project emissions
Emissions associated with ongoing operations of the carbon credit project.
Pyrolysis
Pyrolysis is the heating/burning of an element in an oxygen-absent, controlled environment.
Vintage
This refers to the year, or timeframe, associated with an issued carbon credit.
The state of Biochar
4
The challenge 
The solution
To overcome the challenge of data transparency and scale the biochar market, the following data points are needed to 
ensure trust in biochar credits:
1.
Investment Analysis Parameters: Disclosing ﬁnancial parameters allows the market to assess whether carbon 
ﬁnance is necessary for the project to be economic. Without this data, the ﬁnancial additionality is uncertain.
2.
Biochar Carbon Content: The amount of carbon present in the biochar created is the foundation of the net 
carbon sequestration calculations.
3.
Permanence Adjustment Factor: The permanence adjustment factor used for decay of biochar is necessary to 
verify the emissions calculations and the amount of carbon secured in the biochar over the next 100 years.
4.
H/C Ratio: The ratio of hydrogen to organic carbon, based on lab analysis, is a key factor in the quantiﬁcation of  
the volume of credits issued and the stability of carbon sequestered. 
5.
Feedstock: Disclosing the feedstock type, sourcing principles and feedstock counterfactual related to the 
project is important in understanding impacts associated with feedstocks, and this can have a big impact on 
the net removal calculation.
6.
LCA Emissions: Life cycle assessments (LCA) demonstrate whether emissions associated with the creation 
and deployment of biochar have been accounted for in full. Emissions at each stage of the life cycle should be 
made available to determine any risk of over-crediting.
7.
Geographic Coordinates: Project developers should disclose the location and geographic coordinates of the 
end-use applications of biochar to enable eective monitoring and evaluation of reversal risks and decay rates.
Biochar is an essential technology to help scale the engineered Carbon Dioxide Removal (CDR) market and meet the 
growing demand for carbon removal credits. The majority of delivered CDR credits, ones which are validated and issued, 
are from biochar projects. This means that biochar credits are some of the only technology CDR credits companies can 
purchase and retire to compensate for their emissions.
Biochar developers and registries are nascent and ultimately have yet to face the same scrutiny as other sectors of the 
market. For biochar projects there is a notable deﬁciency of data available around key project performance parameters. 
The rush to procure biochar credits is understandable, but without transparency and deep due diligence the credits 
represent a material risk in your carbon credit portfolio.
With the right data disclosures and collaboration with developers, we can provide the deep project-level insights needed 
to inform buyers’ investment due diligence and help bring these technologies to scale faster. If you’re a project 
developer interested in having Sylvera rate your project to help prove impact and optimize investment, reach out to our 
team. 
What is a Biochar project? 
5
Biochar projects produce removals credits that aim to maximize the production of biochar predominantly through 
pyrolysis. Not all carbon is converted to biochar during the pyrolysis process; bio-gas and syngas are also produced. The 
biochar produced is abundant in carbon, stable and has numerous applications. The stability of the biochar is based on 
the temperature at which it was created and the resulting H/C and O/C ratio.
The input to the process is primarily plant and animal biomass. The biomass can be sourced locally from the surrounding 
forests or agricultural lands and may come from many sources, for example a forest management company with wood 
chips or a farmer with grass and crop residue. The sourced biomass has a direct impact on the quality of the biochar 
created. This input has to be dried and prepared for the pyrolysis plant.
The pyrolysis plant heats up the biomass in the absence of oxygen at high temperatures (up to 800C). The process 
creates other co-products such as bio-oil, syngas and excess thermal energy, which can be sold for additional revenue 
streams. Alternative revenue streams, in addition to those derived from the sale of carbon credits, have meaningful 
implications for the additionality of biochar projects as these revenue streams impact the extent to which carbon 
ﬁnance is required for these projects to be economic. 
Trees, crops and biomass 
capture CO2 by using 
100% sunlight energy
Wood chips, nutshells and 
other bio materials contain 
CO2 but as they decompose 
they release it back into the 
atmosphere.
Biochar projects  break this 
cycle by taking this material and 
converting it into 
biochar-ensuring that the CO2 
stays trapped for 100+ years.
Byproduct 
The pyrolysis process produces 
byproducts including bio-oil, 
syngas and heat
Biochar
The biochar is used for soil, water 
ﬁltration,and biomaterials so that it 
won’t be burned or put back into the 
atmosphere.
Biochar is predominantly used for soil application. Research has shown the addition of biochar can increase soil fertility 
and protect soil from natural risks such as ﬂooding and erosion. 
The carbon content of biochar slightly decreases over the time depending on its decay rate, the soil type and the 
temperature of the soil where the biochar is located. The rate of decomposition can increase based on the temperature 
of the soil. If the biochar is exposed to high temperatures for a long period of time, then it will decompose faster. In this 
case, there could be a potential risk of over-crediting of carbon credits if the high temperature is not accounted for 
appropriately by the project.
Biochar alternative use cases
Water filters & wastewater 
treatment
Building materials
Renewable heat
Added to soil 
(fertilizer, compost additive)
Animal farming 
(feed, slurry treatment)
Fabric additive in textiles
Our top level Sylvera Ratings (AAA, AA, A, BBB, BB, B, C, D) reﬂect whether each credit associated with the project is 
likely to remove 1 metric ton of CO2e emissions.
This rating is derived from a combination of scores that assess the carbon performance, additionality and permanence 
of the project. The scores in these three core pillars are combined in a series of matrices to ensure that 
underperformance in one key area does not get overshadowed by high performance in others. 
Co-beneﬁts are also assessed but they do not feed into the Sylvera Rating, as they do not have a direct bearing on the 
climate impact of carbon credits. Including them in the Sylvera Rating could lead to a high co-beneﬁts score obscuring 
poor performance on carbon removal. Aspects of the project relating to co-beneﬁts that could materially impact the 
project’s ability to deliver it’s stated climate beneﬁt are, however, reﬂected in the Sylvera Rating.
Carbon Score
Additionality Score
Permanence Score
Co-benefits Score
Sylvera’s Carbon Score veriﬁes 
whether the project has 
delivered on its carbon claims. 
This is done by assessing four 
sub-components: the gross 
removals achieved by the 
biochar, the project’s LCA 
emissions, leakage caused by 
the project, and the feedstock 
counterfactual, as well as 
assessing the quality of the 
project’s own LCA, and the 
quality of the data used by the 
project.
Sylvera’s Additionality Score 
assesses the likelihood  the 
project activities would have 
been implemented in absence 
of the carbon revenues. It also 
assess the potential impact of 
policies and regulations as 
well as the risk of double 
accounting.
Sylvera’s Permanence Score 
assesses the risk that the 
removals will later be reversed 
and released back into the 
atmosphere. This is mainly 
based on the risk of biochar 
end-use, driven by its end use 
type, i.e., soil or non-soil 
applications, biochar durability 
and external factors such as 
natural risks, biochar 
application method etc., as 
well as anthropogenic risks.
Sylvera’s Co-beneﬁts Score 
assesses the scope and 
relative impact of project 
activities on local 
biodiversity and 
communities—which are 
linked to UN Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs).
A reminder of our scoring pillars
6
Sylvera Rating
Carbon Score
Additionality
Permanence
Co-benefits
Accurate carbon accounting underpins the validity of a project’s issuance and material under or over reporting of 
emissions will impact the number of credits that have been issued. If Sylvera-detected project carbon is signiﬁcantly 
lower than the project’s reported ﬁgures, reported carbon removal amounts are likely inaccurate and there is a higher risk 
of overissuance.
Why does it matter? 
How do we calculate the Carbon Score?
Carbon Score 
Sylvera’s Carbon Score veriﬁes whether a project is accurately reporting on the carbon removals achieved by the activity.
What is it? 
Note: The Carbon Score must be considered alongside the Additionality  and Permanence Scores. 
7
Gross Removal Quantification
Sylvera replicates the project’s Gross Removal Quantiﬁcation by using the Biochar Decay Rate model. This model 
calculates a Permanence Adjustment Factor that reﬂects biochar decay over 100 years based on key factors such as soil 
temperature, biochar characteristics (including H/C ratio), and local conditions. The analysis ensures alignment with 
Sylvera’s ensemble of independent third-party models, providing an accurate assessment of gross removals.
Gross Removal = 𝑄𝑏𝑖𝑜𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑟 × 𝐶𝑜𝑟𝑔 × 𝐹𝑝 𝑇𝐻,𝑇𝑠 × 44/12
Where:
𝑄𝑏𝑖𝑜𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑟 is the amount of biochar produced over the reporting period. 
𝐶(𝑜𝑟𝑔) is the organic carbon content of the biochar produced. 
𝐹𝑝 𝑇𝐻,𝑇𝑠 is the permanence factor of biochar organic carbon over a given time horizon 𝑇𝐻 in a given soil at 
temperature 𝑇𝑆. 
𝐹𝑝 𝑇𝐻,𝑇𝑠 = 𝑐 + 𝑚 × 𝐻/𝐶𝑜𝑟𝑔
Where:
c & m are constants used in the calculation of 𝐹𝑝 𝑇𝐻,𝑇𝑠
H/Corg is the  molar ratio of hydrogen mass divided by organic carbon mass of the biochar
44/12 is the value used to convert mass of carbon to mass of carbon dioxide emissions
The Gross Removal Quantiﬁcation is based on a Woolf et al. (2021) approach. It is important to use this approach to 
assess gross removals, as the quantity of removals remaining after 100 years will be lower at higher application 
temperatures. Therefore, by assessing the temperature at application, Sylvera can assess the size of removals that 
will be remaining.
Leakage 
Quantification
Biochar Project 
Carbon 
Calculation
Gross Removal Quantification
(Biochar Organic Carbon Content * 
Permanence Adjustment Factor)
GHG Emission 
Quantification
Feedstock Counterfactual 
Removals
FRAMEWORK
To evaluate net carbon removals, Sylvera has developed an in-house Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) model, focusing on key 
emission sources including feedstock cultivation and transport, energy consumption, and construction. This proprietary 
LCA model identiﬁes discrepancies between project reported emissions and Sylvera’s calculations, assessing whether 
project-reported net removal values are robust and consistent. Sylvera’s LCA model has been peer-reviewed by UCL 
Consultants, and uses the most up-to-date emission factors available from ecoinvent, as well as UK Government and 
other academic sources. 
Emission calculations are performed by taking activity data, matching this to an emission factor, and multiplying these 
together to give an output in CO2 equivalent (CO2e):
Activity data * Emission Factor = kgCO2e
Therefore, by performing these calculations across important emissions sources, Sylvera can assess whether the project 
is likely to be accurately reporting its GHG emissions.
Carbon Score continued 
8
GHG Emission Quantification
Feedstock Counterfactual Quantification
Sylvera assesses the counterfactual scenario for feedstock use, determining whether the feedstock would have resulted 
in removals under a baseline scenario. By examining the type and alternative fate of feedstocks, Sylvera assesses 
whether the project has appropriately set their baseline value. In cases of uncertainty, conservative deductions are 
applied to ensure integrity in removal estimates.
Leakage Quantification
Sylvera evaluates the risk of leakage by analyzing the sourcing and usage of feedstocks, as well as potential indirect 
impacts such as land use changes or replacement emissions. The assessment ensures that leakage risk is investigated 
for removal claims. Where data is insuicient, Sylvera applies conservative deductions to uphold rigorous and 
transparent carbon accounting.
Initial situation
iLUC
Grazing
Grazing
Crop
Forest
Initial situation
Replacement 
Residues 
remain
Additional 
fertilisers
Figure 1.  Examples of indirect Land Use Change (iLUC) and Replacement Emissions
FRAMEWORK
1000 kWh 
of purchased electricity
0.27522 
kgCO2e/kWh
275.22 kg CO2e
Electricity 
example: 
Sylvera’s additionality score assesses whether (1) a project would or wouldn’t have been implemented in the absence of 
revenue generated through the sale of carbon credits, (2) the project is not mandatory/strongly supported by policies 
and regulations and (3) the project is not presenting double accounting risk with other VCM activities.
Additionality underpins the validity of credits issued by a project. If the project is not additional, then one credit 
purchased does not equate to one metric ton of carbon avoided and therefore yields no climate beneﬁt above the 
business-as-usual (BAU) scenario.
A project would score high in additionality if Sylvera’s ﬁnancial analysis proves the need for carbon ﬁnance to make the 
project economic. 
This is not a binary test and the degree of additionality depends on the carbon price required to make it economic. On the 
other hand, a project would score low in additionality if the revenues from biochar and any possible co-products (bio-oil, 
energy) are enough alone to make the project economically viable.
Why does it matter? 
Additionality Score 
9
What is it? 
Financial Additionality
The assessment of ﬁnancial additionality involves determining whether the economic viability of the project relies on 
oset revenues. Sylvera examines if the carbon credits revenue bridges the economic viability gap of the project through 
sensitivity analysis. Biochar projects that generate additional revenue streams by selling biochar or co-products to third 
parties, Sylvera assesses whether the project would still be economically viable without oset revenues. If a project is 
economically feasible without carbon credits, the credits are considered non-additional. This ensures that carbon 
ﬁnance is allocated only to projects that require it to proceed.
Biochar projects can have more than one revenue stream. The biochar itself can be sold for anywhere between USD 
$300/tonne and $1000/tonne  based on the quality of the biochar and other transaction parameters. Furthermore, 
pyrolysis also creates thermal energy that can be sold along with any bio-oils produced during the process. These 
products can create signiﬁcant revenues for the project crossing the hurdle rate required to make the project economic. 
If these revenues are not enough, carbon ﬁnance might be required to bridge this gap. However, reliance on high carbon 
credit prices can make the likelihood of achieving an IRR above the hurdle rate more diicult and unlikely. 
A high quality project demonstrates the need for carbon ﬁnance to make the IRR of the project breach the hurdle rate 
with low carbon prices. Furthermore, the project should take into account any emissions associated with production of 
biochar and other products (bio-oil and energy) made possible through carbon ﬁnance.
How does Sylvera assess additionality?
Policy & Regulatory Landscape
Sylvera considers the policy and regulatory context to assess additionality. Projects are evaluated to conﬁrm they are not 
mandated by law or regulation and to identify whether subsidies or government funding diminish their additionality. By 
integrating any provided subsidies or ﬁnancial incentives into our economic analysis, Sylvera ensures that carbon credits 
are issued only where they play a critical role in making the project viable. This safeguards the integrity of credits in 
regions with supportive policy landscapes.
Double Accounting
To address the risk of double accounting, research are performed to ensure that carbon credits are not claimed by 
multiple stakeholders. In biochar projects, this involves verifying that the producer and end user of the biochar do not 
both claim the same carbon beneﬁt. Clear documentation of credit allocation is required to establish ownership and avoid 
duplication. This approach safeguards the integrity and credibility of the issued credits.
FRAMEWORK
Permanence refers to the risk that the sequestered carbon will later be reversed and released back into the atmosphere. 
The input of climatic variables, record of past events, project speciﬁc conditions and mitigative activities are used to 
inform the permanence risk scoring. Permanence is conceptualized as a scale that distinguishes the relative degree of 
non-permanence (or reversal) risk between projects. 
Biochar credits credits have a low permanence risk given the overall high stability of biochar. The only case where 
biochar stability is uncertain is where there is a high likelihood and high severity of ﬁre events, however in comparison to 
nature-based projects, there is signiﬁcantly less risk of reversal. 
The permanence of the carbon in the biochar is based on a variety of factors such as the random reﬂectance, the 
pyrolysis temperature and the H/C ratio. The biochar can also degrade based on the temperature of the soil where it is 
applied. The projects need to assess its biochar carbon storage to have permanence of at least for the next 100 years. 
The soil type, location, and climatic conditions of a project signiﬁcantly inﬂuence the long-term eiciency of biochar 
carbon sequestration. For instance, biochar decays faster in tropical climates like Brazil due to higher soil temperatures 
compared to cooler regions like Finland. Soil mineral content also plays a crucial role; soils with high mineral and water 
content, such as clay, enhance biochar permanence by supporting carbon mineralization and storage. 
The end use and application of biochar must be traceable and monitored to quantify reversal risk. In soil applications, risk 
of reversal can be driven by ﬁre or erosion from ﬂooding  or storm events.
For non-soil applications, the permanence is evaluated from its application  lifespan across various use cases, such as 
biochar application in construction materials, water ﬁltration systems, and energy applications. This involves examining 
how these dierent applications inﬂuence the durability and eectiveness of biochar in retaining carbon. 
Permanence Score 
10
How do we calculate the permanence score?
The permanence score is derived from a comprehensive analysis of observational and modeled data, adhering to 
recognized methodologies and the latest scientiﬁc advancements. The permanence of biochar is signiﬁcantly 
inﬂuenced by its end-use, whether applied in soil or non-soil environments. Sylvera’s assessment evaluates biochar 
stability and decay rate in its speciﬁc application while also identifying anthropogenic risks associated with its use.
Decay rate
Hydrogen to Carbon (H/C) ratio
measure of elemental composition, where a 
lower ratio indicates more stable, aromatic 
carbon. 
Stability rate
Random Reﬂectance
measures the amount of light reﬂected from 
biochar, indicating its level of carbonization 
Pyrolysis temperature
reﬂects the temperature at which biochar 
is produced.
Natural risks
Events such as ﬁre, ﬂood, drought can have a 
direct negative impact on the decay rate o
Soil type and temperature
Soil with high mineral and water content may 
have higher permanence as it can mineralise 
and store carbon. In contrast, higher soil 
temperature leads to faster decay.
Soil application method
Dierent application methods such as 
subsurface soil application, blending with 
manure or fertilizer etc. will contribute to 
dierent levels of permanence.
What is it? 
FRAMEWORK
11
What data do we use in the Permanence Score?
Permanence Score continued 
We assess biochar’s permanence from their H/C ratio in dierent soil temperatures, using the analysis done by Woolf 
et. al, (2021). This analysis calculates the fraction of biochar carbon remaining in soil after 100 years (Fperm) in 
dierent soil temperatures. As seen in ﬁgure below, the higher the soil temperature, the steeper its decay line across 
the H/C ratio. Sylvera assesses the project’s  H/C ratio in combination with its soil temperature to determine its Fperm.
A component of the Stability Rate: the H/C ratio assessment
We leverage a third party date from Copernicus Climate Change Service (C3S) (2022) for our soil temperature 
assessment as seen in ﬁgure 3 below. This is to ensure that the soil temperature of biochar’s application location 
claimed by the project is in line with latest veriﬁed and established soil temperature data.
A component of the Decay Rate: the soil temperature
T=0C
T=40C
Source: Sylvera’s analysis from Woolf et al., 2021
H/C Ratio
Fraction of biochar carbon remaining in soil 
after 100 years (Fperm)
Figure 2. Fraction of biochar carbon (100 years) as a function of H/C ratio and soil temperature
Figure 3. Example of soil temperature map for United States of America
FRAMEWORK
Co-Benefits Score 
12
FRAMEWORK
Sylvera’s co-beneﬁts rating examines whether the project is implementing activities to support local biodiversity and 
communities, as well as the scale and likely impact of these activities.
Sylvera measures the impact biochar project activities have on biodiversity. We leverage data provided by project 
developers, IUCN data, and IBAT data. 
When assessing community impact, we utilize data disclosed by project developers and the Sustainable Development 
Goals (SDG) to triangulate a project’s community impact.
How do we assess the co-benefits of biochar credits?
BIODIVERSITY
We independently identify which UN SDGs the project is contributing towards by assessing the activities implemented 
by the project. We determine the relative impact of activities on local communities by scaling the SDG impact against 
country-level performance, the size of the population aected, and the carbon removals achieved by the project.
Sustainable Development Goals
COMMUNITIES
We assess whether the facility  is located in a conservation area. There are no threats associated such as pollutant 
treatment with the application of biochar in soil or non-soil applications.
Threats & Safeguards
We assess the extent to which the project has contributed to biodiversity loss.
Biodiversity Protection
An example of a biochar projects contribution to biodiversity and community:
Improve soil 
fertility and 
higher crop 
yield
Local 
employment 
opportunities
Reduce 
environmental 
impact of cities
Reduce 
environmental 
degradation
To ensure the project aligns with social safeguard principles, we conduct a thorough evaluation of potential risks, 
including inadequate worker safety, insuicient community engagement, or inequitable beneﬁt-sharing. As part of our 
assessment, we carefully analyze stakeholder engagement processes and worker safety practices to measure their 
impact on local communities. These evaluations are integral to understanding and mitigating social risks while 
fostering positive outcomes for all stakeholders involved.
Social Safeguards
What is it? 
