 
Engineered Carbon 
Removals 
methodology 
 
BeZero Carbon Ratings 
​
 
 
 
 
Contents 
Glossary​
4 
Introduction​
6 
What is the Engineered Carbon Removals sector group?​
6 
Market context​
7 
BeZero Carbon Rating analytical framework and​
process for Engineered Carbon Removals​
11 
Holistic assessment​
11 
Sector and country analysis​
11 
Standards and methodology screening​
11 
Project- and vintage-specific analysis​
12 
Carbon efficacy assessment​
14 
Additionality​
14 
Activity analysis​
15 
Common practice​
15 
Alternatives to the proposed project​
15 
Financial analysis​
16 
Investment analysis​
16 
Carbon revenues​
17 
Barrier analysis​
18 
Technological maturity​
19 
Benefit-sharing​
20 
Legal and policy​
20 
Land and carbon rights​
20 
Policy support​
20 
Regulatory surplus​
20 
Government effectiveness​
21 
National climate and green investment landscape​
21 
Major policies​
21 
Nationally Determined Contribution​
22 
National classification​
23 
Carbon Accounting​
24 
Direct accounting​
24 
Baseline scenario​
24 
Validity of zero baseline claims​
24 
Alternative feedstock scenarios​
25 
Project scenario​
25 
Project emissions​
25 
Measurement and monitoring practices​
25 
Life cycle emissions​
27 
GHG conversions​
28 
Methodological uncertainty​
28 
Carbon accounting uncertainty​
29 
Safeguards​
30 
Leakage accounting​
30 
​
​
ENGINEERED CARBON REMOVALS METHODOLOGY​
2 
 
 
Activity displacement​
30 
Market leakage​
31 
Positive leakage​
31 
Ecological Leakage​
32 
Permanence​
34 
Anthropogenic risks​
34 
Carbon rights​
35 
Technical risks​
35 
Commitment period​
35 
Durability​
35 
Other risks​
37 
Natural risks​
37 
Risk mitigation instruments​
38 
Stakeholder engagement​
38 
Risk buffer and mitigation​
38 
Impact of co-benefits and SDGs on carbon efficacy​
39 
Co-benefits and carbon efficacy​
39 
Sustainable Development Goals​
39 
Interaction of carbon efficacy and co-benefits within Engineered Carbon Removals​
40 
Appendix I: Analytical independence​
41 
Appendix II: Risk factor definitions and analytical framework matrix​
42 
Appendix III: Sources as of January 2025​
43 
Third-party datasets​
43 
Literature sources​
43 
Sample of literature sources​
44 
Appendix IV: Additional reading​
46 
Appendix V: Sustainable Development Goals​
46 
Updates and reviews​
47 
 
​
​
ENGINEERED CARBON REMOVALS METHODOLOGY​
3 
 
 
Glossary 
Baseline: A baseline is the volume of emissions that are assumed to occur in the absence of any 
project intervention. 
BeZero Carbon ex ante Rating: A BeZero Carbon ex ante Rating represents BeZero Carbon’s opinion 
on the likelihood of the carbon credit achieving a tonne of CO₂e avoided or removed. It is an opinion on 
the greenhouse gas efficacy of an ex ante credit (pre-issuance). 
BeZero Carbon Rating (BCR): The BeZero Carbon Rating is a hybrid analytical framework that fuses 
financial, scientific, and policy-based analysis. It provides an opinion on the likelihood that a given 
credit achieves a tonne of CO₂e avoided or removed. 
Biochar: Projects that produce biochar via pyrolysis, the partial combustion of sustainable biomass, 
with CO₂ subsequently stored in soil or non-soil applications. 
Bioenergy With Carbon Capture & Storage (BECCS): Projects that produce bioenergy from the 
combustion of sustainable biomass and geologically store the emitted CO₂. 
Carbon capture, utilisation and storage (CCUS): Projects that capture CO₂ from a point emission 
source (e.g. fossil fuel energy production) and store it geologically (CCS), or use the CO₂ in the 
production of products (e.g. fuels, chemicals, concrete) (CCU/CCUS). 
Carbon dioxide removal (CDR): See Engineered Carbon Removals 
Carbon finance: Financial resources allocated to carbon project activities that reduce or avoid 
greenhouse gas emissions. It is an additional source of revenue that seeks to make such activities 
more financially viable. 
Closed-loop system: Projects that involve a high degree of technical control or containment. 
Commitment period: The duration of time over which a project plans its sequestration activities to be 
maintained.  
Direct Air Capture With Carbon Storage (DACCS): Projects that use technology to remove CO₂ 
from the atmosphere and store it geologically. 
Durability: Durability refers to the robustness of carbon storage. Durability is used interchangeably 
with permanence to define this storage component. BeZero defines durability in our Durability 
Assessment. 
Durability Assessment: The 2023 BeZero Carbon Durability Assessment evaluates the relative 
durability of seven carbon removal storage methods, assessing their physical storage, risk of reversal, 
and scientific certainty. 
Engineered Carbon Removals: Engineered technical solutions that enhance or facilitate the removal 
of greenhouse gases from the atmosphere. One of six sector groups in the BeZero Sector 
Classification. 
Enhanced Weathering: Projects that accelerate the natural process of rock weathering, which stores 
atmospheric CO₂ in carbonate minerals 
Ex ante credits: Carbon credits that are not yet issued, i.e. pre-issuance.  
Ex post credits: Carbon credits that have been issued, i.e. post-issuance.  
Greenfield site: Land that is being considered for development that has not previously been built on. 
Greenhouse gas removals (GGR): See Engineered Carbon Removals 
​
​
ENGINEERED CARBON REMOVALS METHODOLOGY​
4 
 
 
Methodology: A framework that sets out a process and parameters for quantifying the carbon 
benefits of a project. Methodologies enable project developers to quantify baselines, assess key 
aspects like additionality, and define necessary monitoring practices to ensure the greenhouse gas 
emission reductions are verifiable, additional, and quantified.  
Nature-Based Solutions (NBS): Nature-Based Solutions projects aim to achieve emission removals or 
avoidance in the natural environment, these include forestry, soil carbon, and blue carbon. 
Open-loop system: Projects that involve processes outside technical control or containment. 
Project area: The geographical boundaries within which project activities take place. 
Pyrolysis: A combustion process that occurs at high temperatures and in the absence of oxygen, 
which thermochemically converts organic materials into a solid residue with higher carbon content 
and liquid or gas products mainly containing hydrocarbon components. Used in biochar and bio-oil 
methods. 
Rating Committee: A group of members with extensive experience within and across all sectors who 
discuss and debate the assignment of ratings. The Rating Committee oversees the analytical process 
and ensures consistency in the application of rating criteria, methodologies, and comparability of 
ratings across sectors and countries. 
Scalability Assessment: The 2023 BeZero Carbon Scalability Assessment is a first-of-its-kind 
assessment that evaluates the relative scalability of five Engineered Carbon Removals. The 
framework compares these methods against eight barriers to scalability (Energy, Land, Finance, 
Policy, Resources, Localised Impacts, Ancillary Value Chains, and Monitoring, Reporting & 
Verification). 
Stakeholders: Individuals, and/or groups of people who may be affected by the implementation and 
activities of a project. 
Standards bodies: Organisations that develop and revise methodologies to determine the 
greenhouse gas benefits of various types of carbon projects, and inform when and how many credits 
projects can issue.  
Vintage: The vintage year refers to the period of time when the emission reduction or removal 
associated with a credit occurred.  
Voluntary carbon market (VCM): Carbon markets that exist outside of the regulation and 
frameworks of international agreements, and are fuelled by commitments of individuals, as well as 
private and public organisations to reduce GHG emissions through the trading of carbon credits. 
 
​
​
ENGINEERED CARBON REMOVALS METHODOLOGY​
5 
 
 
Introduction 
BeZero Carbon is a global ratings agency for the voluntary carbon market. Our ratings are a publicly 
available, risk-based framework for assessing carbon efficacy. We rate qualifying carbon credits in all 
sectors.  
We take a research-first mindset, fusing traditional capital markets research practices with expertise 
in environmental sciences and technology. We think creatively about climate problems and build 
solutions the whole market can use. 
We have developed extensive analytical frameworks to rate carbon credits on their likelihood of 
delivering on their promised carbon emissions avoidance or removal. These analytical frameworks are 
deeply sector-nuanced and bring to the fore our extensive experience in rating hundreds of projects 
across dozens of sub-sectors. 
Our ratings team is made up of over 70 analysts who create the models and perform the analysis for 
every rating. They combine expertise in climatic and Earth sciences, in disciplines from remote 
sensing, forest ecology, ecosystem disturbance, peatlands, and blue carbon through to statistics, 
machine learning, artificial intelligence, sell-side financial research, industrial engineering, and public 
policy. They hold over 20 PhDs, have published over 200 academic papers, and have been cited over 
10,000 times in peer-reviewed scientific academic literature.   
The market’s number-one risk metric, our ratings are available on our website and dozens of 
marketplaces, alongside extensive analysis and research on our BeZero Carbon Markets platform. 
What is the Engineered Carbon Removals sector group? 
BeZero Carbon's Engineered Carbon Removals methodology is a tool for users of the BeZero Carbon 
Rating to better understand our multifaceted approach to ratings in this sector group. We present 
select case studies to showcase the various parameters through which we assess risk to the carbon 
quality of credits and show how the sector group relates to our overarching ratings methodology. 
Engineered Carbon Removals projects issue removal credits by implementing technical solutions that 
enhance or facilitate the removal of greenhouse gases from the atmosphere. These projects store 
atmospheric carbon in new carbon sinks via biological or geochemical processes. In the BeZero Sector 
Classification system, Engineered Carbon Removals is one of six sector groups and contains four 
sectors and eight sub-sectors. 
​
​
ENGINEERED CARBON REMOVALS METHODOLOGY​
6 
 
 
 
Figure 1. The Engineered Carbon Removals sector group within BeZero’s sector classification system. 
BeZero has several Insights specific to this sector group, designed to better understand and inform on 
this nascent and largely future-facing sector. This includes the Scalability Assessment for Carbon 
Removal, which assesses the barriers to scalability of five methods under a first-of-its-kind 
assessment framework. As well, the Durability Assessment for Carbon Removal, which assesses the 
durability of seven carbon storage methods, a characteristic that sets this sector group apart from the 
rest of the VCM. 
This methodology will provide an initial overview of the rating approach for the Engineered Carbon 
Removals sector group, using mostly top-down examples. 
 
Market context  
The Engineered Carbon Removals sector group is nascent. As presented in Figure 2, the majority of 
annual carbon removal is achieved through nature-based removal methods such as Afforestation, 
Reforestation, and Restoration (ARR), with Engineered Carbon Removals accounting for just 0.06% of 
total annual removal. In achieving global climate targets, this sector group will likely scale in its 
issuance and delivery. 
 
 
 
​
​
ENGINEERED CARBON REMOVALS METHODOLOGY​
7 
 
 
 
Figure 2a 
 
Figure 2b 
 
Figure 2. Figure 2a shows estimated annual carbon removal in GtCO2 from 2023. The majority of 
carbon removal is currently met through nature-based solutions (blue) with only 0.06% met by 
engineered carbon removal methods (orange). Figure 2b shows the estimated annual removal by 
engineered carbon removal method in GtCO2 in 2023. Source: State of CDR 2nd edition, 2024. 
As of January 2025, approximately 12.5 million credits have been transacted within this sector group. 
Of this, 550 thousand credits are considered delivered, ex post credits - approximately 4.4%. At 95.6%, 
the majority of transactions in this sector are for ex ante credits, those that are purchased 
pre-issuance.  According to CDR.fyi, 1.2 million tonnes of biochar have been sold, compared to 7.5 
million tonnes for BECCS and 2.1 million tonnes for the more costly DAC. From the  ex post credits sold 
and issued, 85% are attributed to biochar projects.  
​
​
ENGINEERED CARBON REMOVALS METHODOLOGY​
8 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Volume and composition of purchased versus delivered carbon removal credits. Both sales 
and deliveries have grown considerably in 2024, +73% and +107% respectively. Data source: CDR.fyi. 
As of January 2025, BeZero Carbon has rated 5 ex post Engineered Carbon Removals projects, and 
more ex ante projects as most market activity is happening pre-issuance. For projects to qualify for a 
BeZero Carbon Rating, they must meet our primary qualifying criteria. 
Comparatively, in the wider VCM, approximately 2 billion credits have been issued, of which 283 
million credits have been issued in 2024 alone. The total issuance by engineered carbon removal 
sector group represents less than 1% of total VCM issuance by volume.  
There are 34 methodologies for the Engineered Carbon Removals sector group, as of January 2025. 
Isometric  has the greatest number of methodologies by any standard body, 8 methodologies. 
Puro.earth has supplied the most  credits, with the most frequently used methodology being its 
biochar methodology with 52 projects.  
 
​
​
ENGINEERED CARBON REMOVALS METHODOLOGY​
9 
 
 
Table 1. Standards bodies with applicable methodologies for Engineered Carbon Removals projects, 
as of January 2025. Some standards bodies cover avoidance and removal in one methodology.  
Standards bodies 
 Number of CDR methodologies (of which 
cover both avoidance and removal) 
Carbon Standards International 
3 
Isometric 
8 
Puro.earth 
5 
Riverse Carbon 
2 
Verified Carbon Standard (VCS) 
3 (2) 
Gold Standard 
2 (1) 
American Carbon Registry 
1 (1) 
Running Tide (ceased operations) 
2 
Open Natural Carbon Removal Accounting (ONCRA) 
2 
Project-specific 
 6 
Total 
34 (4) 
The Engineered Carbon Removals sector is financially distinct compared to other sectors in the VCM. 
These nascent technologies have higher costs attributed to being early-stage. Subsequently, credit 
pricing is currently orders of magnitude greater than alternative sectors of the VCM - as 
demonstrated in Figure 4.  
 
Figure 4. The Engineered Carbon Removal sector (orange) has a much higher credit price than other 
sectors in the voluntary carbon market (blue). Data from 2021 to today finds that credit prices in this 
sector are orders of magnitude greater than the rest of the VCM. Source: cdr.fyi, 2025; BeZero Carbon 
analysis, 2024. 
 
​
​
ENGINEERED CARBON REMOVALS METHODOLOGY​
10 
 
 
BeZero Carbon Rating analytical framework and​
process for Engineered Carbon Removals 
We have designed an approach to assessing the carbon efficacy risk for issued carbon credits. This 
framework is applicable to any project type in any sector accredited by any standards body, and 
leverages a blend of qualitative and quantitative factors; financial, environmental, and policy 
assessment techniques; and primary and secondary data sources. 
Our BeZero Carbon Rating Methodology details our risk based assessment for understanding and 
interrogating carbon credit performance of any type, in any sector and country.  
This document provides an extension to our overarching rating methodology. It presents BeZero’s 
detailed analytical framework and process for Engineered Carbon Removals projects. Using select 
case studies, it showcases the various parameters through which we assess risk to the carbon quality 
of these credits, and how this sub-sector relates back to our overarching ratings methodology. 
Holistic assessment  
The assessment of a carbon credit’s efficacy includes a detailed, project-specific, bottom-up, and 
top-down analysis, to provide a comprehensive assessment of risk. Further details on the risk factor 
definitions, the rating process, and the overall risk assessment can be found in our BeZero Carbon 
Rating Methodology. For pre-issuance ratings please consult the BeZero Carbon Ex ante Rating 
Methodology. 
Important elements of the BeZero Carbon rating process that are applicable to all project types are 
described in detail in these documents (but not repeated in this document). These include:  
●​ The steps in the rating process 
●​ The project governance assessment 
●​ Project boundary auditing 
●​ Assessing the risks of double counting 
●​ The integrity of reported issuance 
●​ Assessing rating eligibility (whether projects meet our three primary qualifying criteria)  
●​ The rating assignment process  
●​ The role of the BeZero Carbon Rating Committee 
●​ Ongoing monitoring and ‘rating watch’ process 
 
Sector and country analysis 
Our assessments are based on all available project documentation in combination with our in-house 
models, frameworks, and databases. These include geospatial and Earth observation evidence and 
techniques where relevant, and a curated database from peer-reviewed literature, industry research, 
and third-party datasets totalling more than 12,000 sources as of January 2025. 
Standards and methodology screening 
Our analytical approach evaluates the rules of each standards body and each methodology on an 
individual basis. This screening includes an assessment of methodology development and 
consultation (for an overview of why this is important, see our Insight on carbon market 
methodologies). Further to this, we consider all deviations from methodologies. For Engineered 
Carbon Removals, this may include minimum requirements for the maintenance and calibration of 
monitoring equipment, deductions due to possible project emissions or embodied emissions, and 
various crediting lifetimes. 
​
​
ENGINEERED CARBON REMOVALS METHODOLOGY​
11 
 
 
We also assess the renewal of project baselines to estimate the effectiveness and integrity of 
Engineered Carbon Removals projects where relevant. While some methodologies require projects to 
renew baselines at various defined intervals, this may not be adhered to, or the intervals may not be 
frequent enough to capture factors that can affect the baseline’s validity. 
As outlined in the Introduction, there are 34 verified methodologies for the Engineered Carbon 
Removals sector. There are large variations between projects that could use the same methodology, 
and some sub-sectors are yet to have an applicable methodology available in the market. Further, 
some methodologies for a sub-sector are not applicable to specific projects or regional elements.  
As the sector group develops and more projects apply these methodologies in practice, the 
methodological uncertainties may likely decrease. However, in its nascent state, there are inherent 
uncertainties surrounding methodologies that inform our analysis. 
Under the top-down analytical lens of evaluating risks associated with methodologies and whether 
projects conform to them, we present key parameters in the assessment of Engineered Carbon 
Removals and the methodologies available to date in Table 2. 
Table 2. Key parameters of methodology screening for Engineered Carbon Removals. 
Top-down 
parameter 
Additionality 
Carbon accounting 
Permanence 
Methodology 
Assessment of additionality  Baseline assumptions  
Commitment periods 
Financial analysis 
Monitoring practices 
Use of buffer allocations 
Sources of project or life cycle 
emissions 
 
Ex ante versus ex post issuance 
 
Feedstock sourcing 
 
Approach to leakage discounts  
 
Monitoring of registry operations and credit tracking also form part of our analytical process. We 
screen registry and standards body rules and processes, and take account of any strengths or 
weaknesses in our assessment of relevant risk factors. 
Project- and vintage-specific analysis 
Our bottom-up assessment considers all publicly-available project documentation and data, including 
that provided by the standards body, registry, or project developer, and any information from 
third-party sources, and data sourced using our internal models, notably including proprietary 
geospatial and Earth observation evidence and techniques where relevant. 
Vintage-level assessments are made on two fronts: 
1. Project reporting and crediting: Our analysis ensures that, across each ratable vintage for a 
project, we identify whether projects correctly issued credits towards the market and buffer 
pool and that where credits are transferred, vintage labelling correctly maps onto cancellation 
certificates. 
2. Risk factor assessments: For each of our carbon efficacy risk factors, our analysis spans 
each ratable vintage of a project. This allows us to incorporate changes in project boundaries, 
baselines, issuance and buffer contributions over time. It also enables a dynamic process for 
assessing the role of policy, changes in the investment landscape for removals, and other 
exogenous factors that can influence broader trends in the Engineered Carbon Removals 
sector. 
​
​
ENGINEERED CARBON REMOVALS METHODOLOGY​
12 
 
